hello i'm keith kendrick and i'm the
editor of bbc good food magazine
i'm joined today by good food and
knowledge food director cassie best
uh cassie is here to talk to us about
gingerbread
and three great ways to work with
so uh hi cassie how are you doing i'm
great keith how are you doing
very very good in the festive spirit at
long
last you know absolutely i've been in
the festive spirit since about june i
think
that's when we started planning good
food wasn't it so uh which is uh which
is on the shelves now and it's
you know it's an absolutely
fantastically uh rich
packed you know diverse wonderful issue
for all your christmas ideas so
and one of these things that we we
always go to
at this time of year is gingerbread what
is gingerbread
and what can you tell us about working
with it
so yeah gingerbread is huge for good
food
and the searches for gingerbread just go
through the roof at this time of year
right the way up to christmas
um so gingerbread is it can be lots of
different things really it's a very very
old recipe gingerbread so it dates back
thousands of years um and it can range
from the very thin
kind of brittle biscuits that you see um
you know the scandinavian biscuits
right the way through to softer biscuits
and cake as well gingerbread kind of
cake um so there's a whole spectrum of
gingerbread out there and it's basically
anything that's spiced with ginger
it usually um contains some molasses or
some really dark sticky
sugar to give it that lovely molasses
flavor perhaps some treacle
and it often contains other spices as
well so maybe some nutmeg or some
cinnamon or some mixed spice
um yeah there's loads of different
varieties of gingerbread out there
um and it became i've been doing a lot
of research recently about gingerbread
because i'm hosting a gingerbread
webinar soon um so i discovered that
people started making gingerbread houses
specifically
around the 1800s when the grim brothers
tale of
hansel and gretel um was written so
that's when
you know in germany especially lots of
people started making gingerbread
houses and that tradition was then you
know spread across europe and it was
taken over to america
and now it's just one of the most
popular kind of family
activities that you can do during the
holidays isn't it making a gingerbread
family with the gingerbread house with
with family it's a lovely thing to do
especially if you really enjoy mess and
cleaning up absolutely
with monkeys i use i've always made
gingerbread houses but i
used to remember making these really
beautiful ornate houses and all the
sides fit together perfectly
and now that's just gone out the window
i've got a three-year-old and a
one-year-old and
as soon as i step foot in the kitchen my
three-year-old you know jumps in there
with me and she just
wants to attack everything i make so the
gingerbread houses that we make these
days are very different to the ones i
used to make yeah more like ruined
castles kind of thing
yeah kind of crumbling walls and icing
dripping off the side
so what so what's one of the first
things that we need to know about you
know making it a great gingerbread house
what about the dough talk us through
that
yes so obviously um the dough is really
important if you want to make a
gingerbread house you need to have a
really good
strong structure um so the great thing
about
gingerbread dough is that it's quite
forgiving um
it's not one of these you know soft
crumbly buttery biscuits
that you need to be quite delicate with
when you're working with it you can
roll it and re-roll it because you want
that toughness in the dough
um so it's a really forgiving dough to
work with which is great and it's you
know great if you're baking with kids
um how thick you roll it is really
important if you roll it too
thin then it's going to be quite brittle
and it will break really easily
so you want between kind of half a cent
half centimeter to a centimeter
thick when you're rolling the dough and
i find the best way to do it is to roll
it between
two sheets of baking parchment because
as soon as you start adding flour to the
workbench or on top to stop the rolling
pin sticking you're making the dough
drier which means there's some tips for
rolling the dough yeah good advice yeah
yeah
and so what what's the next thing that
we can take away from uh
from your uh your wisdom so obviously
cutting is very important if you're
making
the house you you can either use a
template and we've got loads of
templates on the
website um or you can make your own
um which can be a little bit more tricky
because obviously you have to make sure
it all
lines up and measures perfectly so that
you know the roof doesn't end up being
too short or the walls don't quite meet
um so i'd advise using a template but if
you want to be
more adventurous then of course you can
make your own and you see these
beautiful constructions don't you on
the bake off and there's competitions
all around the world are they making
gingerbread villages so you can really
go to town with it but you do have to
make sure you've got your ruler out and
measure everything
uh really accurately and then once
you've got your template
obviously it's quite easy to cut the
dough um but you don't want it to warp
or move too much
so you want to transfer it that's
another reason why it's great to
actually
cut it on the baking parchment because
you can transfer it straight to the tray
and you don't have to lift it and worry
about it kind of
falling into bits while you're lifting
it um so cut with accuracy that's really
key
and then a great tip is to actually
re-cut the dough once you've baked it
so as soon as you take the pieces of
gingerbread out of the oven it will
still be quite soft
and you can just pop the template back
on top and use a really sharp knife and
your
um ruler again to just re-cut the sides
because they will kind of spread a
little bit in the oven and you want
really nice sharp sides for a
gingerbread
um and that was really uh really
interesting and
i guess the uh the final point would be
about you know gluing it together and
decorating it
yeah so to glue it together you want to
use a good
royal icing or something with some egg
white in it preferably because that's
got a bit more stability than
you know just a um glass day kind of
icing sugar icing
so go for a royal icing if you can um
if you're allergic to egg whites which
my daughter is so you can't use it
you can just use a glassey icing but
just make sure it's nice and thick
um and i tend to glue the house together
and leave it overnight just propped up
with some tin cans so obviously the roof
is the dangerous part that could easily
slide off so i just tend to pop some
cans
or anything that's you know the right
height to just hold the
pieces in place overnight and just give
it a chance to really
set up before you decorate it um because
that's the really tricky bit isn't it
about making the gingerbread houses
it tends to be quite difficult to get
everything all the pieces to stay in
place
without slipping and falling apart so
i'd say leave it overnight to set
and then the next day you can go crazy
with the decorating
yeah when would you do a gingerbread
house would when would you present it
would it be christmas day or would it be
you know you kind of
snap off a bit throughout the kind of
the the holiday period
yeah i mean the lovely thing about
gingerbread is it it keeps really well
so that's why you know it's perfect for
making a house and keeping it as a
decoration or you can make decorations
for the tree
um it keeps for a you know good three
weeks to a month really
so you can make it now and it's nice to
just have it in the house for a little
while as a decoration and then
you know you can start nibbling on it a
few weeks down the line
um so that's what i tend to do i
wouldn't present it on christmas day
because
there is enough food going on on
christmas day
so i i'll probably make mine in the next
couple of weeks
and then i'll you know have it on the
table as a pretty decoration for a week
or so and then
we'll start snapping bits off and
enjoying it
in the lead up to christmas what a great
thing to do with the
with the family to get in the mood and
really kind of focus the mind it's going
to be fantastic
cassie thanks for joining me today
cassie's got a uh he's doing a webinar
about making a fantastic gingerbread
house you can find details of that on
bbcgoodfood.com
where you can also find lots and lots of
gingerbread
recipes uh both festive and to keep you
going through the year and as cassie
said
lots of templates so if you're not brave
enough to tackle your own project
we've done all the kind of the
architecture design
for you so uh have a great christmas
thanks for joining me cassie
thank you bye
you